---
layout: page
title: Aditya Birla Scholarship Essay 1
modified:
excerpt: ""
---

# Aditya Birla Scholarship Essay 1
It is rightly said that your background has a deep impact on you. As it happens with others, it happened with me. With my parents in medical field, interest in science was natural for me. It was my parents who shaped my interest in science. About 8 years back, one of my cousins who was preparing for AIPMT had come to Jodhpur for his studies. I have a nerve for reading books and his books provided me a great source for reading. Although I didn't understand what the topics meant, but still they were something to read. Eventually as I started understanding the topics, my interest started developing. It gave me an urge to explore more about the world and seek the explanation for the various phenomenons occurring around me.

When I was in third standard, I was introduced to the LOGO language as a part of my school curriculum. That language was a source of enjoyment for me. Watching the pointer move and make various figures at my command was fun. This fun eventually developed an interest in me and opened me to a newworld of computers and programming. As I was introduced to more programming languages like FoxPro, 'c' and C++, programming went on to become my passion and my favorite pastime.

I have a deep passion for science. When I had to make a choice of subject in eleventh standard, I chose to continue my studies in science field. So then I had to choose between mathematics and biology. I was keenly interested in programming and maths and wanted to do my graduation in computer science from one of the premier institutes of engineering, so I chose maths. Also I felt that I could reach more people, that is, I can give more benefits to mankind if I am in engineering field than if I am in medical field.
CSE department of IIT Kanpur is one of the best in the entire world. I always wanted to be a part of this department. So when I secured a rank in JEE with which I could make my dream come true, my first choice was this department which would teach me all what I always wanted to.

Now when I am a part of this department, I aspire to learn all those things related to programming and computers that I always wanted to. Besides regular academics, I want to make my concepts clear about various complex programming skills. I would also like to learn more about the network structure which links the computers all over the world. I want to learn about its design, its functioning and the ways in which it was programmed. I also aspire to learn the logics of programming and algorithm development.I wish to learn more about operating systems and their functioning. I also want to learn high performance computing which includes the programming of super computers and parallel programming for research work which I yearn to do after passing out from here.

After doing this course, I want to go for an M Tech. and PhD. Degree in one of the best universities of the world. Then I plan to return to India and associate myself with some kind of research work with which I can do something for the betterment of mankind.
