---
layout: page
title: Aditya Birla Scholarship Essay 2
modified:
excerpt: ""
---

# Aditya Birla Scholarship Essay 2

Decisions are very crucial in one’s life. They can make or mar your future and have a deep impact on your life and on the lives of those surrounding you. So it is necessary that we have strong and well resolved decision making capability.

There have been uncountable instances in my life in which my determined decision making quality has proved to be an asset for me. I am a kind of person who rarely changes his decision once it has been made. But yes, before taking any decision, I fully consider the pros and cons of the situations and thevarious options I have. I also weigh the doubts and suggestions of others before coming to a decision. This thoughtful decision making saves the time which people generally spend on reconsidering their decisions. I usually use this time in implementing my decision or doing some other creative work.

Thinking about instances where my thoughtful and firm decisions have proved themselves the best, the first instance which comes to my mind is a quite recent one. It was regarding the selection of branch in IIT. Bombay and Delhi have metro culture. The charm of the city and the feeling that a metro city would give you more exposure in the various walks of life attracts students to go to IIT Powai or IIT Delhi. I was also asked by my parents to fill up Bombay and Delhi as my first choices. But I was quite resolute to come to IIT Kanpur due to better quality of academics and research facilities it provides. They accepted my choice half‐heartedly. But when they came to Kanpur and themselves the saw structure and quality of education here, they felt that I had taken the right decision. From my side too, I feel the same. In IITKanpur, the academics and research facilities are par excellence. Apart from academics there are many hobby clubs where students can learn and practice their hobbies. There are student bodies here which take assist the administration in taking many important decisions. This helps in the development of leadership qualities in them and gives them experience of various situations in life.

I had to make one more similar kind of decision about two years back when I was in the eleventh standard. I had to choose a subject in which I would continue my studies. Due to my passion in science, I chose the science stream. Now I had the choice of biology or mathematics. Although my parents hadgiven me full freedom of choice but there were many people who were expecting, or rather advising, me to take biology. They would say your parents are in the medical field, so you would surely do better in biology. This all continued even after I had opted for maths due to my fervor for programming and maths. But when the results were declared for JEE and other exams like KVPY, people finally realized that my decision was not wrong.

There are many more instances where this quality has helped me. Apart from the help it gives, this quality also increases my confidence when my decision goes correct. Also it makes me open to all kinds of situations I may face in future. It gives me a strong standing in situations where a quick decision isneeded. Decision making quality is an important one for a leader as it puts him in a strong position. So I think this consideration qualifies me to be a distinguished ‘Aditya Birla Scholar’.
